hey guys how's it going i'm back here
with another video and today i decided
to
basically create a beginner's video
introducing how to work with graphql for
a front-end using react and we're going
to be using apollo client which is a
a way to interact with a graphql api
and it is a really good library so in my
opinion it's probably the easiest one to
start with
and i'm going to show you guys exactly
how to do that so if you didn't see my
last video
basically i went over how to create a
graphql api
it is totally not not necessary if you
if you already have a graphql api you
just want to know how to connect it with
a
front-end but just to show you guys this
is what i created not this over here
this over here very simple api we have
um the schemas the only schema that we
have is a
a user which contains an id a first name
a last name an email and a password
and all of this data since i wanted to
make this video fit for everyone not
like a specific group of people using a
specific group of
like a specific database i'm using just
a json
like data you can see right here it's
just a random
like data set containing a bunch of
users you can see that each user
has a first name a last name and an
email and a password so that's basically
what we're going to be using
as our fake database right so
currently we have only two two things
that we can do in our application
the first one if you go here to yours to
my schemas the first one is
a query and the query just returns all
the users very simple query
it's called get all users it just
returns every every user
and we have a mutation and this mutation
specifically is just to create a user
so you basically can see that it adds to
the user data a new user containing the
information that we pass
in and if you're not getting what i'm
saying like if you're if you don't
understand
what i'm showing i'm gonna link up here
the first video which basically i go
over how to create the graphical api
and you can watch that and then come
back to this because this over here is
really important as well
so what we're going to be doing now is
we're going to be implementing
everything
into a client using react because a lot
of people will ask me
and it's not it's not similar to what
people are used to do
when you're working with the rest api
where you just make a
like a nexus request an api called a
fetch request to
to your api you need to use a little a
library and in this case we're going to
be using apollo client
so to do that we're going to come over
here and
we're going to basically just install
our
our libraries right i'm going to cd into
my
my client folder as you can see and
in my client folder i already have a
react application there's nothing in it
there's only the app.js and you can see
that the app.js has nothing
inside of it just a just an empty tag
and what you want to do is you want to
install
two libraries so you're an ad the first
one is apollo
client like this and the other one is
graph
ql just these two libraries and if
you're using npm it is npm install
apollo client
and npm install graphql but i'm using
yarn so it's literally just this
this right here i already installed it
i'm going to show you guys in my
package.json
it's over here um let me come here yeah
apollo client over here
this is the version i'm using so if it's
like far in the future and
for some reason the apollo client it's
above version three so it's a bit
different for versions two
to less so that's important but if
apollo client changed in the future i
don't know
this is the version i'm using and you
can see graphql is also installed over
here
so what do we actually want to do well
first of all
let's start creating our application
right so in our app.js
what we want to do is we want to
initially just
set up our project so that it accepts
graphql so the first thing we have to do
is we need to
import some packages so i'm going to
import from apollo kind so
from at apollo client i want to import
some stuff so the first one is apollo
client
why because we're going to be using that
to create our provider
and then we're going to be importing as
well in memory cache because we want to
have caching
in our application we want to import
apollo provider
and obviously if you're a beginner don't
worry about knowing what all of this to
do does we're just going to be using
those to set up our application
and we're also going to import something
called from you'll see why we need to
build a link to connect
to our api so from is just a uh
it's a method from the apollo client
library which allows us to do that
and finally after we do this we
we maybe we need to import a method of
determining if there was any errors in
our api
uh we're gonna import it called on error
from the packages uh at apollo client
slash um client
no it's not it's not client it's slash
link right
slash link yeah and slash error so a
public line contains an error library
inside of it
which contains ways to determine if to
catch errors right so on error is
in my opinion the easiest way of doing
this and i'll show you guys how to build
this
so basically the fundamental idea of how
to make your api work
in react using a polo client is you got
to come over here
above your app dot js in your parent
like your initial component
you have to create something that is the
client the client will be just a way
it will be a an instance of the apollo
client and this is how we're going to
determine if
if we have a correct connection or not
so let's create a variable called client
and it's going to be a new apollo
not a polar provider apollo client
and inside of it we have to pass an
object containing two things first of
all it's a cache
and we're gonna as i mentioned before
we're gonna have uh
in memory cache um this is not important
in the beginning but
you can worry about that later and we're
gonna have link
and the link will be basically the link
to our back end to our server
and obviously we we can just put here
local not not obviously but we can just
put the the actual url for the localhost
we have to make it a diff
in a bit like a bit of a different way
and this is why we actually
imported the from thing over here and
the http link we have to build an http
link
over here and let's do that let's create
a link
equals to and we're going to use the
from library and as i mentioned before
don't worry if you're a beginner and
you're confused about this i was super
confused
and it's not very useful to understand
everything in the beginning
just know that this is a good way to
build your
your basically you start your graphql
api
so we're going to use from the from
method and we're going to pass an error
link which we're going to create
right right like right after this and
then we're gonna pass a
new http link and pass here
um the basically the uri which is the
url for our api which in my case it is
running
on you can see right here it's running
on localhost 6969 slash graphql
so let's come over here and say local
http actually two slashes localhost
let me close this localhost
um 6969 slash graphql
and this is the link for my uh api right
and why do we actually need an error
link is because if there is any error if
graphql catches any errors we need to
tell it
what like how we want it to respond i'm
going to show you guys a very simple way
to
catch errors and very simple way to like
build this
error catching system but this is
definitely going to
be more use like in the future if you
want to
optimize this then definitely do it this
is just a way to not
like carry that much in the beginning
but we're going to create an
error link it's just a link that that
tells us like a
a function that tells us um what we want
to do if there is any error so this is
why we're going to use on
error and on error we just want to
come over here and grab two things
graphql
errors and network errors
i want to emphasize that if you're if
you're confused
right now um just stick around because
this i honestly recommend just copy and
pasting this because it is definitely
not important in the beginning but
it is necessary to start your api work
right
so then we're going to basically just
ask if graphql errors and by the way
this is
the sample i'm getting over here for the
aero link i actually i believe i got
this from
the graphql documentation so i didn't
create this error catching system it's
the simplest way that they
demonstrated to us so graphql errors
um we're just going to ask if there was
any errors then we want to map through
all the errors
and then for every error we're going to
grab the message
the error message also maybe we want the
location for the error
and the path so those are the ones we
might want
and then what we want to do is we want
to just
since we're mapping we want to do
something for each of those errors and
for now let's just alert a message
saying something like
graph ql error
and we want to show it like this let's
just
show the message right now so this is
the basic idea of our error handling
right here
we're just showing any errors right and
for now i think that that's it this
should be okay um we can't even ask if
there was any network errors if we want
um i don't think that's totally
necessary but
let me just check um maybe the if
statement
shouldn't be here no that's correct
yeah that's correct i think so
actually let's just leave it like this i
think it's fine um
let's come over here and now we have an
error link for our link and we actually
started our client so this right now
it's done for
setting up the graphql connection and
honestly just skip around after this
because it's going to get a lot more
easier
so now that we have this we can
basically wrap our
whole application with an apollo
provider
and what will this do basically between
this apollo provider tags
is where you can reach all the like your
your graphql api so it's going to be
served through this
two components and we obviously need to
pass a client and the client we're going
to pass
is the client variable that we created
over here and now we know that anywhere
inside of it we can easily just make
make requests to our api server and
now that we have set up all of this by
the way i need to put error here
i accidentally wrote it wrong now that
we did all of this let's
create an example right let me create a
components folder i just want to have
two components one of them is going to
demonstrate how to
create a user how to run a mutation on
react and the other one is how to
run a query on react right so the first
one is going to be query so let me
create a component called
getusers.js
and i'm going to use the snippet that i
showed you guys in the last video
basically just to create everything just
a simple functional component which
we just want to use it to render all the
users
in our application and to do this
in in react you got to follow us a
simple recipe
the recipe basically is that we need to
create a folder
in our application actually this is in
the recipe but you need to create
a file for your mutations and a file for
a query so i like to create a folder
called graph
ql like this and inside of here i put
two files one for
mutations where i'm going to store all
of my mutations and one for all my
queries so
this is what i'm going to do queries.js
and for the queries i want to put over
here the query that i want to make
and what exactly is the query so if you
watched my last video you know that this
is a query
this is the query we're making in our
graphical um
gui to to basically get information from
our api this is exactly what we got to
put
in our queries folder and a query
queries file
and over here the only thing we need to
do is we need to import
graphql from apollo client i like to
call it gql
from at apollo client and this variable
right here will allow us to make a query
and to make this query we can just say i
want to export this query so i want to
act
so that i can access this query in
whichever file i want to
and let's call it load users it's just
going to return all the users
and it's going to be equal to gql
and this gql query now we can output
inside of here
the whole query that we want by the way
i know it's weird to put this
to like back quotes i don't know if you
guys can see clearly i'll try to zoom in
for just a second
it's you have to put all your query
inside of this two quotes right here
which are like i always forget the name
but they're like back quotes
and i don't know why they did it like
this honestly it looks weird in my
opinion but
this is what we have to do right and
what do we actually put inside of here
well we put a query that we
that we have right that i taught you
guys in the last video so let me put
here a query
um this query basically says i want to
get all users
and for each user that i get
in my like my my data i just want to
show
the id the first name and the email and
the password so this is basic idea of
our query
and this is fine now that we have our
query done what we want to do is we want
to
like actually use that query for
something right so let's come here to
our get users
and let's start importing some stuff so
the first thing i want to import
is the use query hook from
um apollo clients so let's say import
um from up at
apollo client and we're going to have
some some different
um hooks that we want to use right so
the first one is use query
it's going to allow us to get
informations from a query
and we also need the graphql to to use
it
in order to actually get the data right
so
after we did that after we did this um
we can simply come into our function get
users
and we can come over here and say const
and we can pass all the different
information
we want to get from that query so if i
say use query
and i don't want to get confusing i
don't want it to get confusing right now
but
the idea is you're going to say const
use use query pass here the query that
you actually want so let's import the
load users query that we just created
um and let's put a link to our graphql
slash queries file and over here we're
going to import
load query load users and what we want
to pass is load users inside of this use
query so the use query hook is very
simple you pass the query that you want
to
basically fat right you want to run you
want to execute and over here you can
get some sort of information
the information that you can get can
range from
any errors that occur to like if the
data is actually just loading so it's a
state basically you can get loading
to represent like if it's if the data is
being fetched but it hasn't been fetched
yet and that could be useful sometimes
but the most useful thing is the actual
data so data right here will return
the data from our query so now that we
have this
what we have to do is i like to simply
create a use effect
which is going to wait for this data to
be done so it will be received
and it's going to be constantly
obviously checking to see if we actually
have received the data so i'm going to
pass here a news effect
and the user effect will run infinitely
until
we actually there like as long as there
is a change in the data
this basically if you have never if you
don't get this i have a video for a full
on video on use effect
basically we're going to wait for this
data to change it's going to run once
before it
actually loads and then when this
variable changes it's going to run again
so that it basically knows that we have
new data coming in
and now that we have this for now let's
just console.log
data just to see how our data looks like
um let's actually try to to make this
work
to do this we're going to come here to
our apollo provider i'm going to import
the
get users component and
let's make this run right so this isn't
running let me run
yarn start it's gonna run
okay something's already running on port
um what exactly is running on poor 3000
oh my actual
project is already running okay let me
close this
um okay i had a different terminal sorry
but yeah this is the terminal you can
see that for now we have to
not only run our we our react so it's
running right now over here on localhost
3000 but we also need to run our server
so i'm running here node index.js it
says server running let me run that
coming again
and now it's running again so let's
check here
um the way we build it it's it's it's
supposed to whenever i run this over
here
it's gonna return some data as you can
see right here so we're returning get
all users it's an array of a thousand
elements and you can see that it's
actually an object containing a property
called get all users
and that contains an array of a thousand
objects i'm not gonna
actually get all the all the all the
elements
should i get them um no it's too many
it's too much data to just display it in
my screen but you can see that we
actually got the data from our
um api which is awesome right so what i
actually want to do is
i just want to display like the first so
let me come over here
and i want to create a state
and the state will just be a list of
users right
const um list
i'll just call it users and set users
it's just a list of users
it's going to be equal to use state and
it's going to be an array
and in order to make our are actually
users appear in our screen
we're just going to say set users equal
to
um the data dot get let me look at the
console log again
it's an object containing um
get all users so this is what we need to
put dot get
all users and then
get all users is an array containing a
bunch of arrays
and i actually just want to get the
first one so let me just say
zero and now we can come here to our
div and we can just say something like
users dot map
and i want to map through every user and
let's just grab the value
and for each value right here let me
just close this and this so you guys can
clearly see it for each user i just want
to
return the name of the user for now
so let me just return vol dot first name
because that's something that we have in
our application
so let's see if that works let's refresh
our page um
cannot read get all users of undefined
okay
that's because we actually haven't
received our data yet so let's ask
if if data so that's something important
we're going to ask if data
only if the data has been received we
want to set all users
to be equal to this so we've got to wait
for the data to actually be received
so let's check this and users.map is not
a function
why is it not a function this should
actually be a function
um let me see what exactly would be
console.log
get data dot get
all users zero let me just check to see
what exactly is this
so let's see apparently it is
yeah it's an array right oh no it's not
actually an array
it's just a it's just a person which is
weird
let me look at get all users
um oh okay okay
it's it's not an array of arrays it's
like it's just that the console.log
divides it this way
so what i'm gonna do is i'm just gonna
instead of saying console
get all user zero i'm gonna just
set users to every single user and it's
gonna be huge but yeah
you can see we have all of our users
being displayed here we got that from
our api the api is over here you can see
that
if i run this we get all the users so
it's the same users
and obviously this is a thousand
different users being displayed in our
screen which is
yeah it's okay right so now that we have
this i'm actually not gonna
not gonna be displaying this i just
wanted to show you guys how to do this
um i'm gonna show you guys exactly how
to actually work with mutations so
if i were to have a form where i want to
create a new user
how would i actually send that data to
our graphql api
and actually make the run the mutation
right so insert the data into our
database
or into whatever you can see that the
last element here
and all the users is called adrians and
this is something that i emphasized in
the last video because
we're going to be adding and currently
the last element is idea
a thousand because we have a thousand
users i'm gonna be adding another user
through this mutation and it's gonna be
called pedro which is my name
and it's gonna be of id 1001. if you
want to see the
the the behind the scenes of creating
this api mutation on the backend
again watch my last video because i
showed exactly how to do that
but what i'm going to do right now is
i'm actually going to build a component
here
not another folder a component called
form
dot gs just going to be a a simple form
um that is going to contain like a way
of different inputs like first name last
name email password and a button to send
that data and i'm going to come back
after i just created the
simple form because it isn't useful to
know how to create a form for this
the the important information is
actually making the form
be submitted to our api so i'll be back
in a second okay guys so i'm back right
here
and you can see that i created a very
simple form as you can see
nothing too fancy or anything i just
created a form called
that has like inputs first name last
name email
and password i created four states um
over here one for each
input i also need to import the state
and
i created one for each input and
basically what i do is whenever you
write
on the input it just sets the value for
the state
to be the value for the input very
simple stuff over here
just making the form work right and
at the bottom i have a button which when
you click on it it says
add user so let's actually import in our
app.js
let's remove get users because we don't
actually want to use that right now we
just want to use
form and by the way when i write form
it's being automatically imported over
here so you can see get users in form
are being imported so if you go here to
our app react like the
the react tab you can see that the form
appears here i don't care about it how
it looks
i just want to make it work i'm going to
zoom in as you can see it's a very ugly
form but
obviously it's very simple as i
mentioned before
so what do we actually want to do here
in our form.js to send this data
to our graphql api well the first thing
we actually want to do is
not even inside of the form.js we want
to come to our graphql
folder and write our whole mutation so
what exactly i showed you guys what a
mutation looks like in graphql
before it's a bit different from a query
it's a little bit more complicated
but i'm instead of just copying and
pasting from what i did before
i'm going to show you guys how to create
it from here because
we i didn't save what the last mutation
that i showed you guys
so basically to create a mutation we're
going to do it very simple very similar
to what we did with the query we're
going to
export a variable called let's call it
create
create user mutation
something like this and it's going to be
equal to gql
and just like before we're going gonna
put the back quotes to
to write the mutation inside of here and
now with a mutation we gotta
write the word mutation like this mute
mutation then the name of the function
of our mutation so if you recall in our
api over here i'm going to open up the
server folder
in our api in our where we defined our
mutation
um there's the name of the function
right create user just like the name of
the query has to be the same so ghetto
users we used ghetto users for inquiry
we need to put create users similar to
this so let me just copy create user
over here and the format for a mutation
is very simple it's very
simple basically it's almost like a
function you put create
user and inside of here you have to call
create user again
but it's a bit different and i'll show
you guys why and then
after the create user again you need to
put again um
the curly braces what happens is at the
top here
you have to define the arguments that
are going to receive right and also the
type of the arguments you're going to
receive so for example for create user
we want to receive a first name and for
each variable you have to put a dollar
sign
or a money sign and you're going to put
first name
and you're going to define that it is a
string like this
similar to what we did in their backhand
we're going to do it this way
then we're going to put the next element
which is last name right so i'm gonna
come over here and say
last name it's also a string
then email is also a string
um string and then let me see oh i
forgot to put the
the money sign over here money sign
then password it's also a string
so this is basically the idea we're just
defining the types of the variables
and the variables itself and on the
other create user the one down here
we have to just grab the arguments so
put first name
and actually now we're saying that first
name is of type
first name and i know this looks super
weird um i literally don't know why they
do this
this way but this is how it they
actually do it so
i would just recommend doing it this way
and honestly i would do it
i would actually put a like a space
between stuff
um just so that we have a better view of
it so like this
just put a uh and just press enter for
each one of them
and here for the create user we're gonna
do the same thing so for first name
it's gonna be like this and then for
last name it's going to be at last name
this is quite boring but basically this
is what you're going to do
an email is email and then
password is password so i have those
variables that we want to actually
insert into our database
and then down here is what happens after
the mutation so
after this right here right so in inside
of this two curly braces is what happens
after the mutation is done so we can
actually return something for example
i just created this user but i actually
want to keep track of their
first name for example so let me let me
write first name i want to just receive
the first name
as a return from the mutation right or i
can put an id
i can put whatever i want i'm going to
put an id actually so
this is the basic idea this is how you
create a mutation
in your graphql application
in your react right so after we're done
with this mutation
we gotta start working in our form.js
component
by basically start importing this actual
mutation so let's come over here and say
import and again from our graphql folder
but this time it's from the mutations
file
we want to import create user mutation
and we also need to import the used
mutation hook
which is different from the use query
hook that we had before so use mutation
from
apollo client it's a hook from apollo
client and we're going to be using that
to actually make the mutation
so in order to make that mutation we're
going to come here somewhere in our
application before we actually
want to insert the data so up here i
want to insert the data in this add user
function that we created
so up here what i want to do is i just
want to create
a call the user mutation hook like this
and pass the create user mutation
similar to what we did with the query
again right
but the arguments that we get from the
query from the mutation is a bit
different
so the first argument we can get is the
actual
function that we're going to be using to
create the user called
create user it has to be the same as the
one you put down here
on your not down here on your um
index.js so create user
so over here we're going to say create
user and then we can maybe grab
some error that occurred in the while
creating the mutation
and this is the actual standard so you
can see clearly i don't want to confuse
any of you guys
it's different from the query so it's
actually you're using square brackets
and to get the arrow you need to put a
curly braces
when with a query if i come here to get
users it's not square brackets it's
curly braces
and you just put the variables like this
i have no idea why they
made it different um but i'm not gonna
like it's just i don't know why they did
it this way
but now that we have the create user
function create user is a function that
we can just use and pass in arguments
and it's automatically going to make the
api call so
let's come over here inside of our ad
user we want to call create user
and create user very simply you're just
going to pass the object containing
the variables that you want to insert
but
it also needs to first grab a it needs
to have an argument called variables
and then the variables that we want to
insert needs to be inside of this
variables argument so it's an object
containing one
one property called variables and this
variables property contains an object
containing all the data that we want to
send i know that seems a bit confusing
but as you work on it you'll definitely
get it
so the variables we want to send is
first name
and we want to give it the value for our
input called first name and then we want
to send
last name which is going to be last name
then email which is going to be email
and password which is going to be
password so we're just passing
exactly the format of our create user
variables and we're passing the
values for our inputs which are our
states over here that i created
outside of the video because it's not
important for this video so
now that we have this we might also want
to check to see if there was any errors
so to check error very simply you can
just say if
error right if error if there was any
errors i want to
print out console.log error i don't
think there's going to be any errors but
this is the idea right
and now that we have this done we can
actually test to see if our mutation is
working
so let's come over here um i'm going to
open my inspect i'm going to refresh
this
i don't know if there's going to yeah
there's no console log but i just want
to open up if there is any errors we can
check it immediately
but you can see clearly that when i run
the get users query
a bunch of users appear here to the
right and the last user is called
adrian's of id a thousand now let's try
to run
and create a user here so i'm gonna
create this right here
um my shadow and i'm actually gonna put
a random email
at gmail.com and the password is gonna
be
um subscribe
okay this is the information we put
right when i click create user
we don't get anything like immediately
because you can obviously do that
uh later like what you want to what you
want it to happen when you create a user
but if we come here to our network tab
you can see that
there was a graphql request made as you
can see it says graphql
and it was actually a mutation which
basically just sends the data and it
says that the status was 200 so let's
check if that worked
let's come here to our graphical and and
get all users again and see
if we actually have a new user in our
data let's refresh this
if i go to the last element you can see
clearly that now there's a a user
of idea a thousand one called pedro and
hiki
uh his email is adsd whatever we put and
the password is subscribe so
this is the idea we can add how many
users we want we're making the request
we didn't get any errors
and this is the basic idea of making a
mutation work
so that's basically it i really hope you
guys enjoyed this video because
it was actually a hassle to make this
video because i know it's pretty long
teaching apollo client and teaching how
to work with graphql is really hard in
the beginning
and i'm currently in the midst of like
so much work that's why i actually
didn't post yesterday
but i really hope you guys enjoyed this
video
if you enjoyed it please leave a like
comment down below uh comment down below
when you add questions you guys
ask because if you look at my channel i
enter every single comment i try to help
everyone
i have a discord where i help a lot of
people so if you're interested in that
the link is in the description
subscribe because i'm posting every
single day and i see you guys next time